source/blog/2014-02-26-bad-ally-quiz.html.markdown, before:

---
title: Bad Ally Quiz
date: 2014-02-26 23:30 EST
tags: 101, allies
---

The topic of bad "allies" has come up a lot lately. Some people want to know how to identify bad allies.
Others want to know if they are being bad allies. Below is a list of common issues in the ever popular
internet quiz style to help you determine if yourself or someone else might be a bad ally.

This is not about any one specific person. It is a collection of issues myself and others
have seen repeatedly from people claiming to be allies. If you take this personally or think
it's about you, you might just be a bad ally.

So come one, come all, and take the bad ally quiz! The points are mostly made up, but they sure do matter!


## Quiz
Give yourself points for each item that applies, even if it only applies sometimes. Items without a specified value are worth 1 point. For points assigned "per incident," count all incidents from the last year. Be honest.

### Words
* Do you spend a lot of time telling people what a "good ally" you are?
* Do you claim that you never make mistakes or act in an oppressive way?
* Do you complain about spaces that only allow members of an oppressed group because you cannot be involved?
* Do you use patronizing language (e.g. referring to an adult as a child) when speaking with or about people in the group you are allied to? *(20 points per incident)*
* Do you use slurs when speaking with or about people in the group you are allied to? *(1000 points per incident)*.


### Interactions with the people you are allied with
* Do you demand that people educate you (instead of seeking to educate yourself)?
* Do you demand they give you time or attention (e.g. expecting advice on demand, requesting they give you personalized reviews of articles)?
* Do you tell them to fix a specific issue because they are part of a group (e.g. demanding they speak at a conference, insisting they write a post on a specific topic)? *(10 points per incident)*
* Do you tell them how to speak or behave?
* Do you [tone police](http://geekfeminism.wikia.com/wiki/Tone_argument) (e.g. telling them to be nicer, "you'll catch more flies with honey")?
* Do you [concern troll](http://geekfeminism.wikia.com/wiki/Concern_troll)?
* Do you accuse people of overreacting, being too sensitive, or blowing things out of proportion?
* Do you only ally yourself with members of the group who fit your idea of a "model minority" (look, act, and/or behave a certain way) or who agree with you?
* Do you treat the group like a monolith (i.e. assume they all think and act the same way and want the same things)?
* Do you dismiss their personal experiences?
* Do you tell them what tactics to use when fighting oppression?
* Do you use other members of the group to validate your behavior (e.g. I have a black friend, I'm married to a woman)?
* Do you demand praise or acknowledgment of your allyship or specific acts as an ally?
* Do you tend to dominate conversations instead of letting others speak?
* Do you play "[devil's advocate](http://www.shakesville.com/2013/10/liss-says-stuff-3-devils-advocate.html)" when discussing issues important to them?
* Do you ask people about sensitive issues (e.g. assault, genitalia, sexuality)? *(10 points)*
* Do you push or disrespect their boundaries (e.g. continuing a conversation when asked to stop, touching someone without permission)? *(30 points per incident)*.
* Have members of the group you are allied with called you a bad ally or said you were not an ally at all? *(100 points per incident)*

### Making mistakes
* Have you mentioned your status as an ally when called out on mistakes or bad behavior? *(5 points per incident)*
* Do you try to play off mistakes as a joke? *(10 points)*
* Do you act defensively when called out on mistakes or bad behavior? *(5 points)*
* Do you get angry and lash out when called out on mistakes or bad behavior? *(20 points per incident)*
* Do you make the same mistakes over and over again? *(10 points)*

### Actions
* Do you fail to evaluate and understand your privilege?
* Do you laugh at jokes at the expense of the group you are allied with?
* Do you make jokes at the expense of the group you are allied with? *(10 points)* Frequently? *(100 points)*
* Do you sit quietly by when others say or do things that harm the group you are allied with?
* Are you only a fair weather ally (i.e. you only help when things are easy or benefit you)? *(20 points)*
* Do you only call out bad behavior when someone is around to see it and provide you with praise for doing so?
* Do you spend more time speaking for an oppressed group than listening to them or promoting their words?
* Do you frequently speak/write/present about the oppressed group without first suggesting that a program/publication/event/etc. speak to members of that group instead? *(10 points per incident)*
* Do you take credit for the work of members of the group you are allied with? *(10 points per incident)* Without also giving them credit? *(100 points per incident)* While claiming they did not do the work? *(1000 points per incident)*
* Do you do things that actively harm members of the group you are allied with? *(100 points per incident)* Intentionally? *(1000 points per incident)*

## Scoring
The higher your score, the less frequently you act as a good ally. Higher scores indicate you are probably
not an ally at all. Below are some arbitrary scoring breakdowns I came up with.

* **0-1:** Either you're an amazingly awesome ally or you lied on the quiz. The latter seems more likely -- shame on you.
* **2-10:** You're doing a pretty good job, but remember that being an ally is an [ongoing process](http://www.shakesville.com/2013/04/on-fixed-state-ally-model-vs-process.html), so you should continue to work hard.
* **11-24:** You're making some mistakes and have room for improvement, but you are making good progress.
* **25-49:** You make a lot of mistakes, but might still act as an ally at times. You have a lot of room to improve. You should spend more time [educating yourself](/blog/2013/11/02/101-off-limits/).
* **50-99:** You are rarely or never an ally, but might be able to start developing your skills if you're willing to work hard. You need to spend a *lot* of time on [educating yourself](/blog/2013/11/02/101-off-limits/).
* **100+:** You're not ready to be an ally. Stop claiming you are. [Go educate yourself](/blog/2013/11/02/101-off-limits/).
* **1000+:** You're not even close to being an ally. In fact, you're probably actively harming members of the group you're supposedly allied with. STOP IT. Work on improving asap.
* **5000+:** You're not an ally. You're a shitty human being. What the fuck is wrong with you?

Commit message:

Add description to ally quiz.

source/blog/2014-02-26-bad-ally-quiz.html.markdown, after:

---
title: Bad Ally Quiz
date: 2014-02-26 23:30 EST
tags: 101, allies
description: An internet quiz style list of common ally issues.
---

The topic of bad "allies" has come up a lot lately. Some people want to know how to identify bad allies.
Others want to know if they are being bad allies. Below is a list of common issues in the ever popular
internet quiz style to help you determine if yourself or someone else might be a bad ally.

This is not about any one specific person. It is a collection of issues myself and others
have seen repeatedly from people claiming to be allies. If you take this personally or think
it's about you, you might just be a bad ally.

So come one, come all, and take the bad ally quiz! The points are mostly made up, but they sure do matter!


## Quiz
Give yourself points for each item that applies, even if it only applies sometimes. Items without a specified value are worth 1 point. For points assigned "per incident," count all incidents from the last year. Be honest.

### Words
* Do you spend a lot of time telling people what a "good ally" you are?
* Do you claim that you never make mistakes or act in an oppressive way?
* Do you complain about spaces that only allow members of an oppressed group because you cannot be involved?
* Do you use patronizing language (e.g. referring to an adult as a child) when speaking with or about people in the group you are allied to? *(20 points per incident)*
* Do you use slurs when speaking with or about people in the group you are allied to? *(1000 points per incident)*.


### Interactions with the people you are allied with
* Do you demand that people educate you (instead of seeking to educate yourself)?
* Do you demand they give you time or attention (e.g. expecting advice on demand, requesting they give you personalized reviews of articles)?
* Do you tell them to fix a specific issue because they are part of a group (e.g. demanding they speak at a conference, insisting they write a post on a specific topic)? *(10 points per incident)*
* Do you tell them how to speak or behave?
* Do you [tone police](http://geekfeminism.wikia.com/wiki/Tone_argument) (e.g. telling them to be nicer, "you'll catch more flies with honey")?
* Do you [concern troll](http://geekfeminism.wikia.com/wiki/Concern_troll)?
* Do you accuse people of overreacting, being too sensitive, or blowing things out of proportion?
* Do you only ally yourself with members of the group who fit your idea of a "model minority" (look, act, and/or behave a certain way) or who agree with you?
* Do you treat the group like a monolith (i.e. assume they all think and act the same way and want the same things)?
* Do you dismiss their personal experiences?
* Do you tell them what tactics to use when fighting oppression?
* Do you use other members of the group to validate your behavior (e.g. I have a black friend, I'm married to a woman)?
* Do you demand praise or acknowledgment of your allyship or specific acts as an ally?
* Do you tend to dominate conversations instead of letting others speak?
* Do you play "[devil's advocate](http://www.shakesville.com/2013/10/liss-says-stuff-3-devils-advocate.html)" when discussing issues important to them?
* Do you ask people about sensitive issues (e.g. assault, genitalia, sexuality)? *(10 points)*
* Do you push or disrespect their boundaries (e.g. continuing a conversation when asked to stop, touching someone without permission)? *(30 points per incident)*.
* Have members of the group you are allied with called you a bad ally or said you were not an ally at all? *(100 points per incident)*

### Making mistakes
* Have you mentioned your status as an ally when called out on mistakes or bad behavior? *(5 points per incident)*
* Do you try to play off mistakes as a joke? *(10 points)*
* Do you act defensively when called out on mistakes or bad behavior? *(5 points)*
* Do you get angry and lash out when called out on mistakes or bad behavior? *(20 points per incident)*
* Do you make the same mistakes over and over again? *(10 points)*

### Actions
* Do you fail to evaluate and understand your privilege?
* Do you laugh at jokes at the expense of the group you are allied with?
* Do you make jokes at the expense of the group you are allied with? *(10 points)* Frequently? *(100 points)*
* Do you sit quietly by when others say or do things that harm the group you are allied with?
* Are you only a fair weather ally (i.e. you only help when things are easy or benefit you)? *(20 points)*
* Do you only call out bad behavior when someone is around to see it and provide you with praise for doing so?
* Do you spend more time speaking for an oppressed group than listening to them or promoting their words?
* Do you frequently speak/write/present about the oppressed group without first suggesting that a program/publication/event/etc. speak to members of that group instead? *(10 points per incident)*
* Do you take credit for the work of members of the group you are allied with? *(10 points per incident)* Without also giving them credit? *(100 points per incident)* While claiming they did not do the work? *(1000 points per incident)*
* Do you do things that actively harm members of the group you are allied with? *(100 points per incident)* Intentionally? *(1000 points per incident)*

## Scoring
The higher your score, the less frequently you act as a good ally. Higher scores indicate you are probably
not an ally at all. Below are some arbitrary scoring breakdowns I came up with.

* **0-1:** Either you're an amazingly awesome ally or you lied on the quiz. The latter seems more likely -- shame on you.
* **2-10:** You're doing a pretty good job, but remember that being an ally is an [ongoing process](http://www.shakesville.com/2013/04/on-fixed-state-ally-model-vs-process.html), so you should continue to work hard.
* **11-24:** You're making some mistakes and have room for improvement, but you are making good progress.
* **25-49:** You make a lot of mistakes, but might still act as an ally at times. You have a lot of room to improve. You should spend more time [educating yourself](/blog/2013/11/02/101-off-limits/).
* **50-99:** You are rarely or never an ally, but might be able to start developing your skills if you're willing to work hard. You need to spend a *lot* of time on [educating yourself](/blog/2013/11/02/101-off-limits/).
* **100+:** You're not ready to be an ally. Stop claiming you are. [Go educate yourself](/blog/2013/11/02/101-off-limits/).
* **1000+:** You're not even close to being an ally. In fact, you're probably actively harming members of the group you're supposedly allied with. STOP IT. Work on improving asap.
* **5000+:** You're not an ally. You're a shitty human being. What the fuck is wrong with you?
